blog: Add post for relicensing project (#127)
getsolus/solus-site.github.io: content/blog/2026/05/clearing-up-the-fog/index.md

---
authors:
  - image: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/101771435?v=4
    link: https://github.com/malfisya
    name: Muhammad Alfi Syahrin
  - image: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/5798032?v=4
    link: https://github.com/Silkeh
    name: Silke Hoftra
tags:
- news

> date: '2026-05-03T05:54:04+07:00'

Reviewer: Just so it doesn't get forgotten, this should be the date that the post goes live.

Author: Yes, will amend that before going live

title: 'Clearing up the Fog'
url: /2026/05/clearing-up-the-fog
summary: 'Hello everyone! We want to talk about our licensing situation and our plan regarding it. Lets get to it!'
---
![](clearing-up-the-fog-banner.jpg "Morning fog at some trees by Keravanjoki river in Vantaa, Finland")

> Hello everyone! We want to talk about our licensing situation and our plan regarding it. Lets get dive in!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hello everyone! We want to talk about our licensing situation, and our plan regarding it. Let's'dive in!
```

Reviewer 2: The last sentence should be
"Let's dive in!"

Reviewer: Ah yeah, missed that. Edited the suggestion.

## What licensing situation?

> If you don't know, Solus starts its life as [Evolve OS](https://getsol.us/2013/12/13/coming-soon/). Due to a [trademark dispute](https://getsol.us/2015/04/12/whats-in-a-name/), the name was then changed to Solus. More than 10 years passed and Solus is still here. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't know, Solus started its life as [Evolve OS](/2013/12/13/coming-soon/). Due to a [trademark dispute](/2015/04/12/whats-in-a-name/), the name was then changed to Solus. More than 10 years passed, and Solus is still here. 
```

> During its life, the development of Solus and its related projects has happened in various places. They have included IRC, Matrix, Github, and Phabricator, to name a few. One of the most vital parts that make Solus the distribution you love is our package recipes, `package.yml`. The location of its development have moved around several places. 

Reviewer: I think the "One of the most vital parts that make [...]" sentence is out of place here. It doesn't really feel related to the rest of the paragraph. The last sentence is also pretty much the first sentence, but re-worded.

Author: That paragraph used to be one with paragraph after it. I think it will make more sense that way. But I break it up because it is getting too dense. It might be a good idea to combine it again and reworked a few sentences.

Author: What about this [here](https://github.com/malfisya/solus-site.github.io/pull/1)? 

Sorry about using my own fork, I am editing this from GiHub UI.

> During its life, the development of Solus and its related projects happened on various places. IRC, Matrix, Github, Phabricator to name a few places. One of the most vital project that make up Solus the way you love is our package recipes, `package.yml`. Which the location of its development have moved around several places. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During its life, the development of Solus and its related projects happened in various places; IRC, Matrix, Github, and Phabricator, to name a few. One of the most vital parts that make Solus the distribution you love is our package recipes, `package.yml`. The location of its development have moved around several places. 
```

Reviewer 2: The semicolon should be a colon. A semi is used to link complete sentences.

Reviewer: Hmm this is kind of a weird one. Maybe the sentence should be restructured somehow?

Reviewer 2: How about

During its life, the development of Solus and its related projects has happened in various places. They have included IRC, Matrix, Github, and Phabricator, to name a few.

> First, it lived at GitHub under the Evolve OS organization, and then under Solus Project. Then, we moved our development to a self-hosted instance of Phabricator (`dev.getsol.us`). [When the development restarted](/2023/04/18/a-new-voyage/), it was decided to move back to GitHub again under a new GetSolus organization. During these migrations, there were some pieces that got left behind unintentionally. Most notably, the license files for our package recipes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, it lived at GitHub under the Evolve OS organization, and then under Solus Project. Then, we moved our development to a self-hosted instance of Phabricator (`dev.getsol.us`). [When the development restarted in 2023](/2023/04/18/a-new-voyage/), it was decided to move back to GitHub again under a new GetSolus organization. During these migrations, there were some pieces that got left behind unintentionally. Most notably, the license files for our package recipes. 
```

> First, it lives at Github under Evolve OS organization and then under Solus Project. Then we moved our development to a self-hosted instance of Phabricator (`dev.getsol.us`). [When the development restarted](/2023/04/18/a-new-voyage/), it was decided to move back to Github again under a new GetSolus organization. During these migrations, there are some pieces that get left behind unintentionally. Most notably, the license files for those `package.yml`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, it lived at GitHub under the Evolve OS organization, and then under Solus Project. Then, we moved our development to a self-hosted instance of Phabricator (`dev.getsol.us`). [When development restarted](/2023/04/18/a-new-voyage/), it was decided to move back to GitHub again under a new GetSolus organization. During these migrations, there were some pieces that got left behind unintentionally. Most notably, the license files for our package recipes. 
```

Reviewer 2: "there are some pieces" should be
"there were some pieces" since the sentence is past tense.

> In the Evolve OS and Solus Project days, all those `package.yml` files lived in one repository (monorepo) which included its license file. At that time, the packages repository was licensed under [GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE Version 2 (GPL-2.0-or-later)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html#SEC1). When the migration to Phabricator took place, each package recipe was split into its own repository. However, the license file wasn’t carried over with those recipes. Now that we are back on GitHub and using monorepo again, our [getsolus/packages](https://github.com/getsolus/packages) repository no longer includes a license. That is a problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Evolve OS and Solus Project days, all those `package.yml` files lived in one repository (monorepo) which included its license file. At that time, the packages repository was licensed under [GNU General Public License Version 2 (GPL-2.0-or-later)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html#SEC1). When the migration to Phabricator took place, each package recipe was split into its own repository. However, the license file wasn’t carried over with those recipes. Now that we are back on GitHub and using monorepo again, our [getsolus/packages](https://github.com/getsolus/packages) repository no longer includes a license. That is a problem.
```

> In the Evolve OS and Solus Project days, all those `package.yml` lives in one repository (monorepo) which includes its license file. At that time, the packages repository was licensed under [GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE Version 2 (GPL-2.0-or-later)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html#SEC1). When the migration to Phabricator took place, each package recipe was split into its own repository. However, the license file wasn’t carried over with those recipes. Now that we are back on Github and using monorepo again, our [getsolus/packages](https://github.com/getsolus/packages) repository no longer include a license. That is a problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Evolve OS and Solus Project days, all those `package.yml` files lived in one repository (monorepo) which included its license file. At that time, the packages repository was licensed under [GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE Version 2 (GPL-2.0-or-later)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html#SEC1). When the migration to Phabricator took place, each package recipe was split into its own repository. However, the license file wasn’t carried over with those recipes. Now that we are back on GitHub and using a monorepo again, our [getsolus/packages](https://github.com/getsolus/packages) repository no longer includes a license. That is a problem.
```

Reviewer 2: "no longer include" should be
"no longer includes"

## What kind of problem ?

> ### It creates an ambiguity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### It creates ambiguity
```

> The ambiguity came from whether or not our packages recipes is actually open-source. A software license is what distinguishes open-source from closed-source software. Typically an open-source project will use one (or more) of [OSI Approved License](https://opensource.org/licenses). While our packages repository are publicly accessible, it doesn't include a license file, which gives a confusion whether the code is free to use or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ambiguity came from whether or not our packages recipes are actually open-source. A software license is what distinguishes open-source from closed-source software. Typically, an open-source project will use one (or more) [OSI Approved Licenses](https://opensource.org/licenses). While our package repository is publicly accessible, it doesn't include a license file, which brings confusion as to whether the code is free to use or not.
```

Reviewer 2: "packages recipes is actually" should be
"packages recipes are actually"

"(or more) of [OSI Approved License]" should be
"(or more) [OSI Approved Licenses]"

### It creates a confusing contributor environment

> One of the beauty of open-source is that allowing people to explore, modify, and contribute back to the code. As such, we are always grateful and encouraged that people contribute to Solus. However, our current situation introduces uncertainty about whether contributed code has been properly licensed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the beauties of open-source is allowing people to explore, modify, and contribute back to the original source. As such, we are always grateful and encouraged that people contribute to Solus. However, our current situation introduces uncertainty about whether contributed code has been properly licensed.
```

> In most open-source projects, contributor impicitly agree to the license that a project they contribute to is under. For example, if people contributed lines of code to a project licensed under GPL-2.0-or-later, they implictly agree to the license stipulated. Some projects go further by enforcing a [Contributor License Agreement (CLA)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contributor_license_agreement) to explicitly define contributors’ rights and obligations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most open-source projects, contributors impicitly agree to license their contributions under the same license as the rest of the project. For example, if people contributed lines of code to a project licensed under GPL-2.0-or-later, they implictly agree to the license stipulated. Some projects go further by enforcing a [Contributor License Agreement (CLA)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contributor_license_agreement) to explicitly define contributors’ rights and obligations.
```

> Since we never enforce a CLA, and our packages repository lacked a license during a certain period, contributions in that timeframe fall into a legal grey area.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we don't enforce a CLA, and our packages repository lacked a license during a certain period, contributions in that timeframe fall into a legal grey area.
```

### It hinders knowledge sharing

> As you may already aware, we plan to adopt [AerynOS](https://aerynos.com/) tooling in the future. We already use [`ent`](https://github.com/AerynOS/ent/) and [`boulder`](https://aerynos.com/tooling/boulder/) in limited scope within our packaging infrastructure. We will also convert our `package.yml` into AerynOS package recipe format gradually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you may be already aware, we plan to adopt [AerynOS](https://aerynos.com/) tooling in the future. We already use [`ent`](https://github.com/AerynOS/ent/) and [`boulder`](https://aerynos.com/tooling/boulder/) in limited scope within our packaging infrastructure. We will also convert our `package.yml` into AerynOS package recipe format gradually.
```

> When that transition happens, we want to be able to share our package recipes with AerynOS aand benefit from theirs as well. However, if the current licensing situation remains unresolved, it will block us from moving forward with this plan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When that transition happens, we want to be able to share our package recipes with AerynOS, as well as benefit from theirs. However, if the current licensing situation remains unresolved, it will block us from doing so.
```

## Okay, it is a problem. Do you have a plan?

> Yes, we do. Despite this not being an ideal situation to be in, it also presents an opportunity. Since we need to clear up the licensing situation anyway, we can take this chance to chose a license that better fits our goals. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes, we do. Despite this not being a great situation to be in, it also presents an opportunity. Since we need to clear up the licensing situation anyway, we can take this chance to chose a license that better fits our goals. 
```

Reviewer 2: spelling - "greatl"

> As a result, we plan to relicense our packages repository under [Mozilla Public License, version 2.0 (MPL-2.0)](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/MPL/2.0/). We chose this license because it strikes a good balance between so-called 'copyleft' protections and permissability, and it allows us to share code between Solus and AerynOS. Specifically, the `MPL-2.0`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, we plan to relicense our packages repository under the [Mozilla Public License, version 2.0 (MPL-2.0)](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/MPL/2.0/). We chose this license because it strikes a good balance between so-called 'copyleft' protections, and permissability, and it allows us to share code between Solus and AerynOS. Specifically, the `MPL-2.0`:
```

- Ensures that Solus is, and will always be, free and open source.
- Requires any modifications to be done under the same license, keeping it free and open source even if not developed by Solus.
- Offers enough freedom to not be restricted by it, especially in the current mixed-license situation.
- Explicitly allows mixing the license with the GPL, which still applies to older contributions to Solus.
- Is also used by AerynOS, which makes it easy to exchange work between Solus and AerynOS.

More details about the license can be found by reading [the license itself](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/MPL/2.0/) or the [frequently asked questions](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/MPL/2.0/FAQ/) about the license.

> That doesn't mean we can just apply the license to the package repository: we want contributors to explicitly agree to it and help us to make that change, which can be done in the following ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That doesn't mean we can just apply the license to the package repository: we need contributors to explicitly agree to it and help us to make that change, which can be done in the following ways:
```

- By commenting on [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/getsolus/packages/issues/7815), which also details the rest of the plan.
- By consenting to the change in the next contribution to the packages repository.
- By replying to an email that we will send in the future.

> In short, this oversight that came up through our migrations and needs to be cleaned up so everything is clear going forward. Relicensing under MPL-2.0 gives us that clarity. It ensures that our work remains open, contributions are properly defined, and collaboration can happen with confidence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In short, this oversight that came up through our migrations needs to be cleaned up so everything is clear going forward. Relicensing under MPL-2.0 gives us that clarity. It ensures that our work remains open, contributions are properly defined, and collaboration can happen with confidence.
```
